Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. in our last
video we introduced decimal numbers as a natural
extension of the hindu-arabic form of an integer I
also said at that time that this topic was fraught
with potential difficulties and ambiguities that
affect a lot of mathematics so it's important for
us to go reasonably slowly and carefully over
this so last time what we were talking about is
powers of 10 which of course are very familiar
when we express a number like four thousand six
hundred and ninety three in hindu-arabic form
we know that this 3 represents the number of
ones this nine represents the number of tens the
six represents the number of hundreds and four
represents the number of thousands but now we're
also allowing the possibilities of not just having
positive powers of 10 but also negative powers
of 10 and that means simply that as we move to
the right we divide by 10 at each stage so if we
divide one by 10 we get 1/10 and 10 to the minus
1 is just another name for 1/10 we divide by 10
again we get one hundredth which we write as 10
to the minus 2 divided by 10 again we get one
thousandth or 10 to the minus 3 so this number
represents not just for thousands six hundreds
nine tens and three ones but also five one tenths
plus one one hundredths plus eight one thousandths
so here we see it expressed very explicitly four
times 10 to the 3 plus 6 times 10 squared plus 9
times 10 plus 3 times 1 plus 5 times 1/10 plus 1
times 1/100 plus 8 times 1 over 1,000 we can
write that out as a fraction because these
all fractions or rational numbers and we could add
them all up and it's four thousand six hundred and
ninety three that's the integral part and over
here if we add up these things over a common
denominator we get five hundred and eighteen
thousands well we can bring all of that over
a common denominator of one thousand and then we
would have the number four six nine three five one
eight now that number is not in reduced form as a
rational number both numerator and denominator in
this case are even so we can certainly at least
divide by two we divide it by two we would get
this equivalent form for the rational number
in fact that's now in reduced form okay so
we've had this discussion we kind of know what
the various things mean but I guess we haven't
really given a formal definition of what exactly
is a decimal number here's a decimal number a new
kind of mathematical object or is it just a name
for what's essentially a rational number that we
already know about so how should we position this
this idea in the context of what we've already
done our answer to that question is that a decimal
number is a particular type of rational number we
will not consider it as a new type of mathematical
object so here's an official definition a decimal
number is a rational number which can be expressed
as a over B where a and B are both integers and
where the integer B is a power of 10 in other
words it's one of one ten hundred thousand ten
thousand one hundred thousand million and so on
so we consider one to be a power of ten because
we remember we last time we said that ten to the
zero would be thought of as being one so one is
sort of by default a power of 10 and what we mean
by a power of 10 is just a certain number of tens
all multiplied together so a rational number is a
decimal number precisely when it can be put in the
form a over B where the denominator is a power of
10 all right let's look at some examples 1/2 is a
decimal number why well because we can write 1/2
in another way that's 5 over 10 when we write it
like this which is a perfectly equivalent way
of writing 1/2 we see the denominator is 10
and so that means that this rational number is
a decimal number how about 13 over 5 well here
I've rewritten it I've multiplied numerator and
denominator by 2 obtaining a denominator of 10 so
once we have a denominator of 10 or any power of
10 that automatically qualifies this number to be
a decimal number here's another example 3 over 8
well they can be written as 2 cubed now that gives
us the idea that we'll multiply the numerator
and the denominator by 5 cubed if we do that then
the denominator here becomes 10 cubed or 1000 the
numerator is 3 times 5 cubed which is 3 times 125
so we get 375 over a thousand that is a decimal
number because the denominator is a power of 10
and so 3/8 is a decimal number so a decimal number
is a particular kind of rational number all that
we require is that we can write it as a rational
number where the denominator is a power of 10
it's important to realize that not all rational
numbers are decimal numbers for example 1/3 is not
a decimal number there are many equivalent forms
for the fraction one-third but none of them have a
denominator which is a power of 10 we can multiply
by 2 to get 2 over 6 when we get multiplied by 10
to get 10 over 30 but this is not a power of
10 it's a multiple of 10 but not a power of 10
in fact no matter what fraction we write for it
the denominator will always be divisible by 3 and
so it can't be a power of 10 12 over 7 is not a
decimal number we can write it in many different
forms we can multiply top and bottom by 2 to get
24 over 14 or we can multiply them by 10 to get
120 over 7 or by a hundred to get 1,200 over 700
or by minus 3 for example to get minus 36 over a
minus 21 that's also an allowable form for this
rational number but the denominators that we get
are always multiples of 7 so they can't be of the
form 10 to the N they cannot be a power of 10 so
this rational number he is not a decimal number
here is some useful terminology that clarifies
things when we were talking about rational numbers
let's say that a rational number a over B where a
and B are integers is in reduced form if the two
integers that we're talking about have first of
all no common factors well except for plus or
minus 1 any two integers have plus or minus 1
as a common factor but aside from those sort of
trivial ones a and B have no common factors and in
addition the denominator B should be positive then
we say that the rational number a over B is in
reduced form so for example these examples are in
reduced form 2 over 3 four over nine minus eight
over 21 267 over 22 in each case the numerator
and the denominator have no common factor and the
denominators are all positive these four examples
are not in reduced form two over four well there's
a common factor of two fifteen over nine a common
factor of 3 0 over 3 a common factor of 3 because
3 divides 3 and 3 also divides 0 2 / - 7 not
reduced because the denominator is negative
which is not allowed the reduced forms of integers
well integers and rational numbers are technically
separate but in practice we often think of them as
being one included inside the other but still we
want to keep in mind that these are separate
types of objects so when we're talking about
integers in the context of rational numbers we'll
write them like this in reduced form so well 3 is
actually 3 over 1 2 is actually 2 over 1 0 is
0 over 1 minus 1 is minus 1 over 1 and so on we
just arrange that the denominator be 1 so here is
a pleasent theorem that every rational number has
a unique reduced form that is the reduced form
of a rational number is unique meaning there's
only one of them a rational number cannot have two
different reduced forms so for example 3 over 7 is
the only reduced form of that rational number all
of the others like 6 over 14 are not reduced I'm
not going to prove this ok so it's a it's a it's
a theorem that needs to be proven but I'm going to
state it and maybe leave it to you as an exercise
another theorem our rational number whose reduced
form is a over B is a decimal number precisely
when B is equal to 1 or B is a product of twos
and/or 5s so in other words the denominators
that are allowed are not just powers of 10 in
the reduced form but any product of twos and/or
fives for example these numbers here all have
denominators which are either 1 or power of two a
power of five or a mixed product of twos and fives
all right that's actually the same as 16 times 10
16 is 2 to the fourth 10 is 2 times 5 so that's
a product of twos and fives so let's have a look
at now this example sort of to illustrate things
this will sort of illustrate why the theorem
is true consider the rational number minus 8
over 1250 here's this first of all in reduced
form it's not in reduced form it couldn't be
because the numerator and the denominator are
both even but nevertheless let's have a look
at how the denominator looks 125 is the same as 5
cubed times 10 and 10 is the same as 5 times 2 so
this thing here is a product of twos and fives
so it means even if we cancel the factors that
it has in common with the top the factors that it
will have will still be twos and fives and so the
claim is it's actually a decimal number how do we
show that it's a decimal number well the idea is
to look at the fives and twos that appear and try
to match them up so that they make tens so five
times two is ten so we try to match up thighs
with twos to get tens here there's 110 already
there's three fives multiplying together if we
multiply top and bottom by three twos in other
words two cubed then the effect will be that this
combination will be the same as ten cubed so then
the denominator will just become a power of ten
namely 10 to the fourth multiplying by two cubed
is the same as multiplying by eight so we'll head
of minus 64 over 10 to the fourth which is minus
64 over 10,000 that is clearly a decimal number
and it shows how you can prove this theorem that
the denominator if it's just made of twos and
fives you can multiply by more twos and fives
top and bottom to convert the denominator into
a pure power of 10 this entire discussion here
obviously rests on the fact that 10 is 2 times 5
this is the prime decomposition of 10 and it's a
bit of a biological accident that we're working in
base 10 just because we have 10 fingers if we were
working with a different base then we probably
wouldn't be talking about decimal numbers we would
be talking about only good numbers or acceptable
numbers or something else but we have 10 fingers
so we're working with decimal numbers and decimal
expansions now I'd like to be just a little bit
more precise or more formal about the decimal form
of a decimal number so if we have a decimal number
which is a rational number then it has a decimal
form it has this alternate way of writing it down
using the hindu-arabic notation augmented with
these decimal digits to the right of the death
point1 explain how we actually do that so suppose
that q is a decimal number which means that it's
a rational number something of the form a over B
where a and B are integers where we've written it
in a form so that that be the denominator is some
power of 10 its 1 or 10 or 10 squared or 10 cubed
etc now suppose further that a is not a multiple
of 10 in other words that we've cancelled any
powers of 10 that might have been in existence
B we know is a power of 10 a we consume is not a
multiple of 10 because otherwise we could cancel
a factor of 10 from top and bottom all right so
then a is an integer so it could be positive it
could be negative and here is its hindu-arabic
form so this means the actual digits that we use
when we write down a in hindu-arabic form that's
the number of ones the number of tens etcetera a
0 a 1 up to some number of digits a sub n minus 1
is the second last one and the last one reading
from this way is a sub N and we'll assume that
B is some power of 10 let's say 10 to the K so
what's the formal sort of procedure for creating
a decimal form for this decimal number it's to
start with this expression here when we just copy
this thing down but we put a decimal point there
and then what we're going to do is we're going to
move that decimal place over K places because the
denominator is 10 to the K so for every 10 in the
denominator we have to move that decimal over 1
so we'd have to move it over K times once twice
3 times 4 times all the way up to K times now two
things could happen here right the K can be sort
of less than n so it means that we sort of star
at some point where the decimals sort of in the
number already or it could be that K is much
bigger than n in which case we're moving over
moving over moving over by the time we get to
over there we still have more moving to go we
still have to move more over well what we do in
that case is we add zeros to the to the left of
the number to the left of a n to give us something
to move the decimal place over with okay that's a
little bit you know abstract because there's K's
and ends it's a lot easier to appreciate if you
see an example so let's have a look at an example
to make sure we understand how to convert from a
decimal number in in the rational number form as a
ratio of integers to its decimal form all right so
we're creating decimal forms for decimal numbers
here is a decimal number our first example 347
divided by 10 it's a decimal number because it's
got a denominator which is a power of 10 so how
do we create the decimal form for it we take the
numerator write it down with a decimal point at
the very right most spot right beside the 7 so
right here and then we move that decimal place
over once for every 10 in the denominator well
there's only one 10 in the denominator so we move
it over once so now it's there we get thirty
four point seven here we have eight thousand
three hundred fifty-six divided by a hundred eight
thousand three hundred fifty-six with a decimal
point right there and then we move that decimal
place over two spots because there's two powers
of ten in the bottom the denominator giving us a
three point five six and just to make sure that
we understand why that's working so let's have
another look at this example here this number
is three times 10 squared plus 4 times 10 to the 1
plus seven times 10 to the zero all divided by 10
what we divide this by 10 we divide each term by
10 so the exponents drop by 1 we get 3 times 10
to the 1 plus 4 times 10 to the 0 plus 7 times 10
to the minus 1 and that's what we're writing down
here this is 3 times 10 to the 1/4 times 10 to
the 0 or 1 plus 7 times 10 to the minus 1 or 1/10
that's a justification for why this works let's
look at the same thing over here this was 8 times
10 cubed plus 3 times 10 squared plus 5 times 10
plus 6 times 1 we're dividing it by a hundred it
means each of these powers of 10 drops down by 2
so we get 8 times 10 to the 1 plus 3 times 10 to
the 0 plus 5 times 10 to the minus 1 plus 6 times
10 to the minus 2 and then we look at the various
powers of 10 8 3 5 6 the decimal place is right
there after the 10 to the 0 being the ones column
just a few more examples 125 divided by a thousand
put the decimal there then divide by a thousand so
divided by 10 by a hundred by a thousand we end
up with a decimal place over there but we agree
that we don't like that decimal place just by
itself like that it's a little bit lonely so we
don't stick a zero in front of it just to make it
a little bit easier for us to see that that's a
decimal number that that decimal point really
is part of the number and not a period of the
previous sentence over here - 83 over 10,000 well
we would put the decimal point over there let's
use this place over here so there's a decimal
point to start with and then we have to move
it over one two three four places one two at
this point we have to add some more zeros so
we can go three four we've moved it four places
over from where it started and we get point zero
zero eight three and because we like to have our
numbers starting with a zero if they're all the
digits are to the left of the decimal place we
write minus zero point zero zero eight three and
how about five over one here's another convention
that we agree we are going to write five over one
by starting with the five and putting the decimal
place and then we're going to move it over nothing
at all because there's no power of 10 here or
there's zero powers of 10 so the decimal place
is going to stay where it is but we're going to
agree it's another convention that we're going
to add an extra zero in such a case to make sure
that we recognize that's a decimal number we're
talking about and not a sentence ending with
five and that's a period because a period in the
English language and the decimal place look a lot
the same so this is a way for us to minimize the
possibility of that decimal place being confused
with a period there's one kind of special number
that's worth considering the number zero it's
often special often we need to think what happens
in the special case when we have zero zero is zero
over one as a rational number when we write that
down zero with a decimal place it's not going
to move but we prefer to write zero point zero
so the same reason we wrote five point zero and
the zero to the left the same reason why we had
a zero to the left here that's a little bit odd
we've got two zeros actually in the decimal form
for zero it's a convention that makes it easy to
recognize how we're talking about a decimal form
of that rational number now let's say a little
bit about how to visualize decimal numbers
because we're breaking things up into ten it's
nice to have a two-dimensional picture to start
with so let's start by using row rectangles for
ordinary natural numbers the natural number four
can be represented by four squares put together
in a row if we do it that way then a number like
a half can be naturally represented as half of a
square and since we're moving in this direction
we'll divide the square in this direction
into a half so 4.5 which is like four and
a half can be represented by putting this four
together with one of these halves something that
looks sort of like that there's the four
and there's the half tacked on at the end
now what about other decimals well like say
1/10 if we take the same square and divide it
up equally into ten equal pieces well each piece
is going to be rather narrow something like that
if we have say three of them well then it'll be
a little bit more visible maybe something like
that so this would be maybe three tenths so if we
took our four and we added three tenths well we
get something just a little bit less than a half
but more decimals representing small or rational
numbers become increasingly difficult to visualize
if this is 1/10 roughly and we divide that itself
into 10 equal pieces well then each piece will
be very thin something like that you'll hardly
be able to see it so that's the trouble with
decimals is visualizing very small decimals is
hard but it's the same problem that we have with
natural numbers visualizing big natural numbers is
also hard these two problems are complementary if
something is too big it's hard to see if something
is too small it's hard to see nevertheless let's
have a go and sort of create this framework for
visualising numbers we could call it the grid
line sort of a one-dimensional array of unit
cells like this and we mark the divisions so they
arbitrarily call that zero and then 1 2 3 4 5 6
and so on in this direction negative numbers in
this direction then this is very convenient for
visualizing natural numbers for example the number
7 would be that rectangle going all the way out
to 7 well the integer -5 would be the rectangle
emanating in this direction going out to minus 5
all right suppose we want something like 3 point
7 that's going to be represented by our rectangle
which is somewhere between the rectangle 4 3 and
the rectangle 4 4 and now I've divided by hand the
region from 3 to 4 into 10 roughly equal pieces
and then sort of counted seven of them across and
that's sort of an approximation to three point
seven so by subdividing each square into 10
equal pieces we can visualize decimal numbers like
three point seven well working with the squares is
a little bit unnecessary it ultimately it's really
just the extent in this direction which matters so
we can simplify things by just drawing a line
itself with equally spaced positions labeled
0 1 2 3 4 5 in that direction minus 1 minus 2
minus 3 minus 4 in that direction we call that
the number line and by subdividing each interval
between adjacent numbers into 10 we can call it
a decimal number line and that then can be used to
position decimals with just one additional decimal
point nodes with some one tenths we can visualize
for example three point seven would be rate their
five point three one two three four five and
point three be three of these little one tenths
so we'll be right there point eight there's zero
there's one point eight would be there - point
two vo out there - four point one would be just
a little bit past minus four so that'd be right
there so as long as there's not too many decimal
digits past the decimal point a number line like
this allows us to visualize the decimal number
what if our decimal number has not just tenths
but also hundredths for example say two point six
three well that kind of number requires a little
bit of magnification this is the basic idea that
allows us to deal with more complicated decimals
we're willing to magnify our picture though how
does that go well let's start right here with
just our ordinary number line or a part of it
of course we always only see a part of it going
from minus one to four zero one two three four and
between two and three I've divided things up into
ten little equal pieces so where is 2.63 going
to be well there's two there's three 2.1 2.2 2.3
each one of these little segments represents 1/10
so 2.6 3 is going to be somewhere between 2.6 and
2.7 but it's not so clear here because the scale
is relatively small so what we're going to do is
we're going to take this part of the number line
and we're going to magnify it this represents a
magnifying glass which we put sort of above that
interval there and we're going to use a 10 times
magnifying glass one that blows things up by
a factor of 10 that's what this picture here
represents I've now taken this segment from 2 to
3 and blown it up so there it is now from 2:00
to 3:00 so now you can see more detail the little
lies that you were barely visible to you no doubt
that I've drawn here all right now these ones
here they are separated naturally because we've
magnified things and we can see now their names
so this will now be 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7
two one eight two one nine and three so each
one of these intervals represents one tenth
this whole interval represents one the same
as that did in the original picture all right
so where is 2.63 well we look over to 2.6 there
it is there and 2.7 is there and now we can see
some more detail between 2.6 and 2.7 we can also
divide that up into 10 equal little pieces now
if each of these is 1/10 then each one of these
little pieces that I've drawn will be 1/10 of
1/10 which is one hundredth and so 2.6 3 will be
2 point 6 plus 3 of these little one hundredths
so it'll be right there well maybe you could say
well that's still too small I still can't see what
you're doing they're not so what I'm gonna do
is magnify that yet once more okay so I'm gonna
take that portion of it put on 10 times magnifying
glass on it and now we're expanding or blowing it
up to here so the 2.6 and the 2.7 are now here and
here and these little divisions that I had before
are now much more visible there's one there one
there one there one there and one there one there
one there one there one there one there and I've
labeled these things perhaps you can't read them
but I'll read them for you so that's two point
six one two point six two two point six three
two point six four two point six five two point
six six two point six seven two point six eight
two point six nine two point seven so now we can
see where 2.63 exactly is it's right exactly here
that thing there is exactly 2.63 we've had to
blow things up by a factor of Ted in this case
twice to give you a very clear picture of where
this is right so this is a blow-up of that little
interval there while this thing here is a blow-up
of that interval there so what I've shown here is
actually happening right in there somewhere but
we've blown it up twice if we wanted more decimal
digits well we require more magnification so for
example suppose we had wanted two point six one
eight which has three decimal places so that would
be somewhere between two point six one which is
in this picture and two point six two so it'll be
somewhere in there and that might also be a little
bit hard for you to see exactly where things are
so that magnifying glass there multiplies that by
ten here's two point six one a two point six two
blown up so okay I haven't actually now label the
exact numbers here because the numbers get too
long but this represents the point two point six
one one this one is two point six one two two
point six one three these are all thousands now
these were tenths these were hundredths these are
now thousands so two point six one eight is two
point six one eight right there and you get the
idea the more decimals that we want to visualize
the more magnification we're going to have to
do and we're going to see this this idea of
magnifying blowing things up being willing to to
expand the picture and look at more what's small
it's gonna be a very important idea for us as we
start doing more analysis and calculus kinds of
things in the future and as we start investigating
the various problems that currently exist with
decimal numbers all right so we've visualized
decimal numbers we've said more or less precisely
what they are now how about arithmetic how does
a riff that they go with decimal numbers the two
operations of addition and multiplication behaves
somewhat differently for addition what we do is we
take the two decimal numbers that we want to add
now we line them up one on top of each other so
that the decimal points align that means that the
ones columns lines the tens columns align and so
on as well as the 1/10 column the 100th column the
1,000th column so on and then we start adding just
as if these were regular numbers from the right
hand side carrying whatever necessary so 3 plus
0 is 3 this is really 3 1000 plus 1 1000 equals 3
1000s here we have two one hundredths plus 9 100's
is 11 one hundredths and there's one of them there
the other 10 become a 1/10 there are nine 1/10 the
4 plus 9 is 13 carry the 1 11 carry the 1 2 we got
two hundred and thirteen point nine one three now
this operation is exactly the same operation as
addition for the corresponding rational numbers
these are rational numbers after all in the
more usual way this rational number is 3 4 7
to 3 divided by a thousand dividing by a thousand
would move the decimal place to there this number
here is 1 7 9 1 9 divided by a hundred to moving
the face fair how would we add these two fractions
just using rational arithmetic we would get them
over the same denominator they're both powers of
10 which makes the denominator easy to choose we
just choose the largest power of 10 which is a
thousand that's going to be the common denominator
that means we only have to multiply this one top
and bottom by 10 to get now common denominator
of a thousand so then what amounts to is adding
this number with this number which I've done over
here and I hope you see that this computation is
essentially exactly the same as this one except
there are no decimal points here and there's a
zero here where there was sort of an empty space
here so having got that we would then divide that
by the common denominator or a thousand which
would move then the decimal place over one two
three right there so I hope this explains why the
procedure for adding decimals is exactly the same
really as the procedure for adding ordinary
natural numbers except we have to keep the
decimal place in the same place always so make
sure you understand the equivalence between the
rational number approach to doing arithmetic now
the decimal number approach doing the same thing
there pretty well the same so we want to remember
that decimal numbers are just a particular kind
of rational number so their operations with
decimal numbers are really the same as their
operations for rational numbers let's look at
the multiplication suppose we want to multiply
one point two times three point zero seven well
first we could convert both of them to decimal
numbers or fractions 12 over 10 for this one 307
over 100 for this one how do we multiply these
two fractions well we multiply the new murders and
we multiply the denominators so over here we would
make the calculation of how to multiply 307 by 12
get 3684 while 10 times 100 is a thousand so the
answer then is obtained by taking this thing and
dividing it by a thousand which moves the decimal
place over three one for every factor of 10 in
the denominator there I hope that seems right
one point two times three point zero seven should
be a little bit more than three because it's one
point two a little bit more than three so what
is the general method the general method is just
to multiply the integers without decimal points
to look at the two decimal numbers that you've
gotten and to temporarily forget that there are
any decimal points just think of it as twelve and
three hundred and seven and do that multiplication
first then after you've gotten that which would in
this case be this then you have to adjust by the
fact that you have to then divide by the decimal
the power of ten that you were disregarding and
how many powers of 10 were you disregarding well
you were disregarding one of them here and two
of them here so you have to divide by three of
them to compensate so you adjust by a power of
ten the exponent is the sum of the number of
decimals of the two numbers individually just
a few more examples how about point one eight
times five point four point one eight is the
same as 18 over 100 five point four is the same
as 54 over 10 so when we multiply those together
we're getting 18 times 54 divided by a hundred
times 10 or a thousand 18 times 54 is 972 so we
get 972 divided by 1000 and the effect of that
is to move the decimal place over three so we
get point nine seven two we like to put a zero
in front so it's zero point nine seven two here
we have one point zero zero nine two times zero
point zero three five well the first decimal
is really this rational number the second one
is this rational number when we multiply them
multiplying the numerators is this number here
multiplying the denominators is four zeroes here
three zeroes here so they better be seven zeroes
there so we have to take this thing here we have
to move the decimal place from the rightmost point
over seven places one two three four five six we
have to add one more so we put an extra zero to
allow the decimal place to move over we stick it a
little zero in front fur prettiness so the answer
is point zero three five three two two which makes
sense it's almost the same thing as that thing
just a little bit more notice that this last zero
that you might expect to be here has been dropped
because it's unnecessary the zero at the end
is unnecessary unless it's just directly to the
right of the decimal we keep it as a convention
otherwise we drop it so well done we've covered
a lot of territory today heaven we we've talked
about what decimal numbers really are but they're
visualization and arithmetic with them next time
we're going to take what we've learned about
decimals and apply that thinking to polynomials
and pollie numbers we're going to introduce an
analogue of decimal numbers for paly numbers when
I call those lower rot poly numbers so that's what
we to do next time I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening